#summary IOOS Animal Acoustic Telemetry (AAT) Data Project
#labels AATDataProject

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

= Improving Access to Animal Acoustic Telemetry Observations =

[http://www.ioos.gov IOOS] - [http://www.nanoos.org NANOOS] - [http://oceantrackingnetwork.org/ OTN] - POST (Pacific Ocean Shelf Tracking Network)

The purpose of this project is to engage in small-scale collaboration with important emerging data providers of both physical and biological observations-the Pacific Ocean Shelf Tracking (POST) project.


== Objectives and Tasks to be addressed in this project ==
The project objectives are to:
  # Extend, adopt and implement data and metadata standards and data services for animal acoustic telemetry observations.
  # Implement a standard approach for exposing these observations and information via web services.
  # Develop limited, regional, accessible online products for browsing and visualizing such data, based on a customer-specified set of requirements.
To ensure relevance and future extensibility, this project will involve potential customers drawn from POST and NANOOS stakeholders (particularly fisheries state agencies) as well as NOAA partners. We will seek broad community participation in technical discussions and priority-setting exercises related to the execution of project objectives. IOOS and NANOOS leadership will ensure adherence to IOOS DMAC recommendations and extensibility to other groups, datasets and regions.

This project will build on existing [http://www.ioos.noaa.gov/data/welcome.html IOOS DMAC guidance and activities regarding biological and broader oceanographic data access].
 

== Project Documents and Reports ==
These documents are currently in various stages, from draft to completed.
  # Statement of Work
  # [http://ioostech.googlecode.com/files/POST_DataSystemDescription_DRAFT1.0.doc POST Data System Description]
  # Requirements: Survey results and initial requirements synthesis
  # Brief comparison of some existing systems
  # Content Standard: A metadata convention for animal acoustic telemetry data (document and tables)
  # System Design, including diagrams


== Project Data Services ==
Data Services being implemented by this project are based on [http://coastwatch.pfeg.noaa.gov/erddap/index.html ERDDAP] and [http://geoserver.org GeoServer]. Configuration files and instructions to set up ERDDAP and GeoServer instances for AAT data will be provided at the end of the project.

A collection of Python data access and visualization scripts that illustrated these services are [https://www.mygists.info/emiliom/tags/animalacoustictelem accessible as IPython notebooks at https://www.mygists.info/emiliom/tags/animalacoustictelem]. Here are two that access data from ERDDAP: [http://nbviewer.ipython.org/6767422 Example 1] and [http://nbviewer.ipython.org/6767450 Example 2].


== AAT Metadata Convention ==

===Origin of the Convention===

The AAT Metadata Convention is based on data input forms from Pacific Ocean Shelf Tracking (POST), Ocean Tracking Network (OTN), Great Lakes Acoustic Telemetry Observation System (GLATOS), HYDRA, and The Integrated Marine Observing System (IMOS, the Australian Animal Tagging and Monitoring System (AATAMS), with additional feedback from other individual researchers and database operators such as Tagging Of Pacific Predators (TOPP) and Kintama Research.

===Purpose of the Convention===
The purpose of the community standard is to ensure that: 
  * Enough information is transmitted to make data understandable (hence “required” fields)
  * The origin of the data is clear, and credit (attribution) is maintained
  * The receiving system can interpret the transmitted data without human intervention, including if necessary how flat files can be reassembled into a structure such as linked database tables.
  * Download AAT Metadata Convention here:[http://ioostech.googlecode.com/files/AAT%20Metadata%20Convention%20v1.2.pdf AAT Metadata Convention]
  * The [http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/animal_acoustic_telemetry vocabulary defined by the AAT Metadata Convention is hosted on the MMI ontological repository]. Individual terms may be referenced from it via URL's, such as http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/animal_acoustic_telemetry/animal_origin

== Other Resources ==

=== IOOS Biology Data projects ===
  * http://www.ioos.noaa.gov/dmac/biology/welcome.html
  * http://www.ioos.noaa.gov/observing/animal_telemetry/welcome.html
  * [http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/podcast/p0413.html#dd46 NOAA National Ocean Service Podcast (April 2013): Today on Diving Deeper, we explore the world of animal tagging with Zdenka Willis from the U.S. Integrated Ocean Observing System.]

=== POST and relevant OTN Data repository ===
  * [http://members.oceantrack.org/data/discovery/NEPACIFIC.htm Ocean Tracking Network NE PACIFIC Ocean Data Series]

=== ISO Dataset metadata (the 19115-related family) ===
The NOAA Geo-IDE site [https://geo-ide.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php?title=ISO_FAQ#What_are_all_of_these_numbers.3F has a nice summary of the differences between the three inter-related ISO metadata standards 19139, 19115 and 19115-2]. But it doesn't address the "Marine Community Profile (MCP) of ISO 19115". Here's a summary of the 3 ISO standards and one community profile:
  * *ISO 19115* is the main geospatial metadata standard that [http://www.fgdc.gov/metadata/fgdc-iso-activities "describes the general content of the metadata and relationships between metadata elements. It does not, however, provide any guidance on how the metadata records should be built and formatted."]
  * *ISO 19139* [http://www.fgdc.gov/metadata/fgdc-iso-activities provides the XML encoding schema implementation for ISO 19115.] So, 19115 is the content model, 19139 is the packaging.
  * *ISO 19115-2* has emerged in IOOS, oceanographic and meteorological circles as the ISO standard of choice for environmental datasets. [https://geo-ide.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php?title=ISO_FAQ#What_are_all_of_these_numbers.3F "Unfortunately, the name of 19115-2 is a bit misleading. It is essentially an extension of 19115 that adds information about missions, platforms and sensors, along with a few other things. Most environmental observations involve sensors, so 19115-2 is probably the right standard to use for most environmental datasets, not just imagery or gridded data."]. _ERDDAP uses ISO 19115-2 as its ISO dataset metadata standard._
  * The *Marine Community Profile (MCP) of ISO 19115* was defined by the Australian Ocean Data Centre around 2008. MCP [http://www.aodc.org.au/index.php?id=37 "supports the documentation and discovery of marine spatial datasets and forms the foundation of the Marine Catalogue. The MCP has been developed in accordance with the rules established by the International Standard ISO 19115 Geographic information - Metadata. The MCP is a subset of the standard and includes all ISO 19115 core metadata elements. In addition, the MCP has defined supplementary elements, codelists and controlled vocabularies to assist in the description of marine resources."]. _OTN is using the MCP._

=== Data Services used by animal acoustic telemetry groups ===
  * [http://oceantrackingnetwork.org/ OTN]: Geoserver, OGC WMS, KML

=== Other relevant systems ===
  * http://hydra3.sound-data.com
  * http://data.glos.us/glatos
  * http://aatams.emii.org.au/aatams/

=== Miscellaneous ===
  * From Bob Simons, Regarding "Xtracto scripts": The R and Matlab scripts which make it easy to get the physical oceanography data (e.g., sea surface temperature, chlorophyll a) related to each point of an animal's track are available from http://coastwatch.pfel.noaa.gov/xtracto/ The author is Dave Foley, dave.foley(at)noaa.gov
  * From Derrick Snowden: [https://gist.github.com/rsignell-usgs Here are a bunch of ipython notebook examples put together by Rich Signell]. Many of them are focused on accessing netCDF/OPeNDAP datasets.