#summary NEW, VERY TEMPORARY/DRAFT PAGE IOOS Instructions and Guidelines for use of Controlled Vocabularies in IOOS-compliant data services

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

=Introduction= 

Controlled vocabularies clarify the meaning of common concepts and enable more interoperable data systems through more precise definitions, and machine readable online references.  This document describes the policies and relevant controlled vocabularies that have been adopted or developed by the IOOS community, including, context and specific instructions for use and implementation in data services. They primarily target SOS service requests, but are of general applicability in other services and IOOS DMAC areas as well. The content is intended primarily to serve consumers and providers, including software developers and data managers. 

All such controlled vocabularies developed or adopted, which include parameter and platform terms and definitions are hosted on the [http://mmisw.org/orr/#b Marine Metadata Interoperability Ontology Registry and Repository] Website.  

=Parameter Vocabulary Use Policy= 

The first step to using controlled vocabularies is finding the best one.  Criteria for selecting the best controlled vocabulary should be based on:

 * the content
 * Is it community-maintained?
 * Is it well-managed?
 * Is it interoperable? 

From the [http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/documents/cf-standard-names/about CF Metadata NetCDF Climate and Forecast Metadata Convention Website] accessed on 22 July 2013.

IOOS vocabulary policy has evolved to require users search terms from registered vocabularies and ontologies on the MMI site or other well-established, community maintained vocabularies before developing new terms.  The preferred use of terms from the list of vocabularies IOOS supports includes references to a large set of observed properties (sometimes referred to as a phenomena, parameters, or variables).  Any property encompassed in the parameter vocabularies named in this document is supported.               

* How to Reference Vocabulary Terms

URLs automatically assigned by MMI based on content should be referenced in the SWE element:field in the GetObservation [http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/source/browse/#svn%2Ftrunk%2Ftemplates IOOS SOS template v1.0 schema].  

* SWE element:field reference example:
	
{{{
</swe:field>
          <swe:field name="air_pressure">
            <swe:Quantity definition="http://mmisw.org/ont/cf/parameter/air_pressure">
              <swe:uom code="hPa"/>
}}}

* Vocabulary Selection Process

In a hierarchical process designed for selecting observed parameter terms, the  [http://mmisw.org/ont/cf/parameter Climate and Forecast (CF) standard names parameter vocabulary] is intended to be the primary source for observed property names and definitions to be referenced in the SOS service requests (see How to Reference Vocabulary Terms section).  In the specific case that a term is used in the standard_name attribute of a variable encoded in a CF compliant netCDF file, the CF standard names parameter vocabulary is the only appropriate vocabulary to use.

The CF standard names parameter vocabulary is limited and will not be always be sufficient to use.  The first option is to consult a list of ontologies and vocabularies registered under the IOOS authority in the MMI ORR.  The full list including mappings can be found [ http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos here].

For convenience and completeness, the IOOS Parameter Vocabulary incorporates CF terms that are widely used in IOOS. [http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/map_ioos_cf An MMI-based ontological mapping has been created between IOOS and CF terms], such that a reference to a term in one vocabulary is automatically linked to an appropriate term on the other vocabulary if such a match exists.

The next option is to develop or propose terms when the “IOOS” vocabularies are not enough.  Terms that are developed must follow the [http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/documents/cf-standard-names/guidelines Guidance for Construction of CF Standard Names].  It is the responsibility of the data provider to confer with the IOOS Program on new used to ensure coordination.  The IOOS Program can facilitated a process to include new terms in one of the IOOS developed controlled vocabularies or seek approval of the term with the CF standard community or another accepted vocabulary standards group.  The IOOS Program will notify the data provider when the term has been registered.  

* Detailed Steps for Vocabulary Selection Process: 

* Part A - Search Primary Vocabularies 

1.	Search the [http://mmisw.org/ont/cf/parameter Climate and Forecast (CF) standard names parameter vocabulary] for atmospheric, climate, ocean and surface parameters. * 

2.	Use the [http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/  Darwin Core terms list] to search for reference definitions that describe biodiversity data.*

3.      Terms found in either the CF vocabulary or DwC Terms List must be used if acceptable. 

*In cases where equivalent or nearly equivalent terms exist, the preference is to use CF terms over DwC terms especially if the data set is encoded in CF netCDF files (or OPeNDAP equivalent). 

* Part B - Search Secondary Vocabularies 

3. 	Search for terms in the IOOS authoritative vocabularies ([http://mmisw.org/ont/mmi/resourcetype/parameterIOOS Parameter Vocabulary v2.0], [http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/biological IOOS Biological Terms]) registered in the MMI ORR.

4.	Use any terms found that are acceptable.  New terms may need to be developed or suggested.

* Part C - Develop or adopt New Terms

5.	New terms can be adopted from other lists for addition to one of the IOOS registered vocabularies; or alternatively

6.      New terms can be developed, but must follow the [http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/documents/cf-standard-names/guidelines Guidance for Construction of CF Standard Names].

7.      The data provider does not need approval before implementing new terms.  But, the data provider must confer with the Program on terms that they use through development or adoption from other vocabularies in order to maintain the highest level of interoperability.      

8.	The IOOS Program will facilitate the process to include new terms in the appropriate IOOS registered vocabulary or seek approval of term with the CF standard community or another accepted vocabulary standards group.  

9.	The IOOS Program will notify the data provider when the term has been registered.  

The IOOS Program Office (Rob.Ragsdale@noaa.gov) should be consulted at any step in the process if there are questions.  
-------------------------------------------------------

= Select Controlled Vocabularies =

The controlled vocabularies IOOS supports and/or have been registered at the MMI ORR Website includes: 

(NOTE: The list below is fine, but it isn't inclusive.  Not sure what to do here because there are actually much more than four lists at the above URL)
The list of vocabularies includes:
 * [#Observed_Property Observed property (or "parameter")]
 * [#Station_Platform_Type Station platform type]
 * [#IOOS_Partner_Organization IOOS partner organization]
 * [#Organization_Societal_Sector Organization societal sector]

[#Additional_Vocabularies_And_Concepts Additional, related concepts are also used in IOOS services], some of which have also been formally implemented as MMI vocabularies but may not be used yet or deliberately by service providers.

== Observed Property ==

IOOS supports the inclusion and standard referencing of a large set of observed properties (sometimes referred to as phenomena, parameters, or variables). Any property encompassed by the following two vocabularies is supported:
  # *[http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/documents/cf-standard-names/about Climate & Forecast (CF) Standard Names Parameter Vocabulary.]* The MMI vocabulary is located at http://mmisw.org/ont/cf/parameter . CF standard names focus on physical and chemical terms and pays only limited attention to areas like biology and ecology.
  # *[http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/parameter IOOS Parameter Vocabulary v.2.0].* A vocabulary created via an IOOS community polling of terms in use by the 11 RA's in 2009-2010, and a follow-up process of QA/QC, refinement and consolidation of duplicates. The MMI vocabulary location is: http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/parameter
  # *[http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/  Darwin Core terms list]

The background and IOOS use of these vocabularies is described in detail in [#References (1)].

*Usage in SOS request parameters and XML responses.* See the [http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/source/browse/#svn/trunk/templates/Milestone1.0 IOOS SOS Milestone 1.0 response templates for complete implementation details and direct reference.]

|| *SOS Operation* || *Request parameters* || *Response: XML block (XPath)* ||
|| GetCapabilities || - || /sos:Capabilities/ows:OperationsMetadata/ows:Operation/ows:Parameter/ows:AllowedValues/ows:Value ||
||         "       || - || /sos:Capabilities/sos:Contents/sos:ObservationOfferingList/sos:ObservationOffering/sos:observedProperty ||
|| GetObservation  || || _!TimeSeries feature-type, multi-sensor response:_  ||
||         "       || observedProperty || `*` /om:observedProperty ||
||         "       ||       "          || `*` /om:result/swe:DataStream/swe:DataChoice/swe:item/swe:DataRecord/swe:field/swe:Quantity ||
|| DescribeSensor || - || /sml:SensorML/sml:member/sml:System/sml:components/sml:ComponentList/sml:component/sml:System/sml:outputs/sml:OutputList/sml:output/swe:Quantity[@definition] ||

- _None, Not applicable_

`*` _Preceded by /om:!ObservationCollection/om:member/om:Observation_

=== Selecting a vocabulary term ===

For convenience and completeness, the IOOS Parameter Vocabulary incorporates CF terms that are widely used in IOOS. [http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/map_ioos_cf An MMI-based ontological mapping has been created between IOOS and CF terms], such that a reference to a term in one vocabulary is automatically linked to an appropriate term on the other vocabulary if such a match exists.

  * _The use of CF vocabulary references is encouraged (but not mandated) when a relevant term exists in that vocabulary._ This preference exists to support interoperability with the wider community using CF.
  * _When the desired term is not found on the CF vocabulary, an IOOS Parameter Vocabulary reference should be used if available._

=== Terms not found on either vocabulary ===

If the desired parameter is not found on the CF and IOOS vocabularies, IOOS should be notified and engaged to discuss adding the term to the IOOS Parameter Vocabulary, following a publicized and accepted process that's reasonably fast and a reasonably small burden on participants. In parallel, IOOS will maintain an engagement with the CF community to discuss adding parameters that are not currently present. *(TODO: Need to provide instructions to service providers as to what to do in the short term, e.g., include the observed property using a urn template similar to station identifiers, or the MMI IOOS url parameter reference? Or do not include the observed property until the term has been added to the IOOS vocabulary?)

=== Composite Properties ===

The CF standard names vocabulary only defines scalar properties. Previously, IOOS defined three composite ("vector") properties made up of two or more scalar properties: *winds*, *waves* and *currents*. These composite properties are supported via the IOOS Parameter Vocabulary, and will be referenced like any other term there, eg:  http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/parameter/wave


== Station Platform Type ==

The [http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/platform IOOS Platform Vocabulary (http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/platform)] references and defines platform types used to describe each station asset. This vocabulary was developed by IOOS (with guidance from MMI) in 2012-2013 through a concerted effort drawing from current needs and previous IOOS and MMI experiences. [http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/wiki/PlatformVocabulary This effort, the vocabulary itself, and instructions for usage are described elsewhere.] The vocabulary of approximately 35 terms provides a consistent terminology to describe a wide array of platform types on which sensors are attached and data sets collected. These terms must be used as [http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/source/browse/trunk/templates/Milestone1.0/SML-DescribeSensor-Station.xml classifier entries in SOS DescribeSensor SensorML responses].


== Organization Descriptors and Roles ==

IOOS has implemented as MMI vocabularies two kinds of organization or institutional descriptors (classifiers): *IOOS Partner Organization* and *Organization Societal Sector*.

=== IOOS Partner Organization ===
IOOS data providers, including IOOS Regional Associations (RAs) and Federal Agencies, should be referenced using terms corresponding to standard RA and agency acronyms (eg, GLOS, SECOORA, USACE) as listed in the MMI-hosted IOOS Partner Organization vocabulary at http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/organization. Note that the organization term in the URL is case-sensitive.

*Usage in SOS XML responses: [TO-DO: the Response entries will be linked to SOS response templates, so that full usage details are readily accessible]*

|| *SOS Operation* || *Request* || *Response: XML block (XPath)* || *Comment* ||
|| GetCapabilities || - || /sos:Capabilities/ows:ServiceIdentification/ows:Keywords/ows:Keyword  || *Required*. RA keyword must be the first keyword listed [*Eric, is this still true?*]. ||
|| GetObservation  || - || - || No RA reference. ||
|| DescribeSensor || - || `*` /sml:classification/sml:ClassifierList/sml:classifier[@name="ParentNetwork"]/sml:Term[@definition="http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/definition/parentNetwork"]/sml:value || *Required*. Also use <sml:codeSpace xlink:href="http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/organization"/> ||
||         "       || - || `*` /sml:classification/sml:ClassifierList/sml:classifier[@name="publisher"]/sml:Term[@definition="http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/definition/publisher"]/sml:value || *Required*. Also use <sml:codeSpace xlink:href="http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/organization"/> ||
||         "       || - || `*` /sml:contact[@xlink:role="http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/definition/publisher"]/sml:ResponsibleParty/sml:organizationName || *Required*. ||

- _None, Not applicable_

`*` _Preceded by /sml:SensorML/sml:member/sml:System_

=== Sponsorship ===
The definition of platform sponsorship (financial or other kinds of support) is located at http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/definition/sponsor. Asset platforms that are partially or fully supported by IOOS must be attributed with a sponsor entry that includes: {{{<sml:value>IOOS</sml:value>}}}. This information is encoded as a classifier on the SOS DescribeSensor response:
{{{
<sml:classifier name="sponsor">
  <sml:Term definition="http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/definition/sponsor">
    <sml:codeSpace xlink:href="http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/organization"/>
    <sml:value>ACE</sml:value>
  </sml:Term>
</sml:classifier>
}}}

=== IOOS Organization Societal Sector ===
The [http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/sector IOOS Organizational Societal Sector vocabulary (http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/sector)] distinguishes between different segments of government (eg, federal, state, municipal), and academic, tribal, industry and other divisions. It is currently used primarily to specify the operator sector.

The vocabulary does not distinguish international, non-US organizations as such, and should be applicable within their national contexts; for example, a Canadian provincial agency should be described with the term "gov_state". International providers are handled via the specification of a country name in the SensorML Operator role contact information.

/sml:SensorML/sml:member/sml:System/sml:classification/sml:ClassifierList/sml:classifier/[@name="operatorSector"]

===SWE Definitions===

An SOS SWE element definition vocabulary was developed to be used in the IOOS SOS v1.0 templates.  The vocabulary terms reflect specific IOOS conventions for use in standard SOS SWE elements found on the [http://mmisw.org/orr/#http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/swe_element_type MMI Ontology Registry and Repository].   

References available on the MMI website give examples of where to use the terms in the IOOS SWE SOS template v1.0.
 
=== OLDER STUFF regarding RA, Provider/Owner and other background/organization roles ===
Mainly in SensorML: service provider, data publisher, asset operator. Also: IOOS Regional Association. See [http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/definition IOOS Vocabulary and Category Definitions]. Example from sml:contact elements:
{{{
<sml:contact xlink:role="urn:ogc:def:classifiers:OGC:contactType:owner">
    <sml:ResponsibleParty>
        <sml:organizationName>ORCA-UW</sml:organizationName>
        <sml:contactInfo>
            <sml:address>
                <sml:country>USA</sml:country>
            </sml:address>
            <sml:onlineResource xlink:href="http://orca.ocean.washington.edu" />
        </sml:contactInfo>
    </sml:ResponsibleParty>
</sml:contact>
}}}

  * See these wiki pages for earlier discussions [RepresentingRAAffiliationInServiceMetadata] and [RepresentingRolesinServiceMetadata].
  * [https://groups.google.com/d/msg/ioostech_dev/aAsiZta7mVs/WUfVKMalZf0J Relevant discussion thread from ioostech_dev, from Oct 2011 (_Institution roles in SOS & IOOS Catalog: "Organization" vs "Data Provider"_)]
  * See also [DescribeSensorMetadataForIOOSSOS discussion by Micah, in wiki page DescribeSensorMetadataForIOOSSOS].
  * And [https://geo-ide.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php?title=Sensor_Observation_Service_Capabilities_and_ISO_Metadata Ted Habermann's synopsis on the GEO-IDE wiki]


== Definitions ==

[http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/definition IOOS Vocabulary and Category Definitions] is an MMI vocabulary used for clarifying the meaning of roles, classifiers and other general terms used throughout the SOS web services, particularly the DescribeSensor SensorML response.

== Keywords ==

Including geographical regions? RA in GetCapabilities Keywords?



= Other vocabularies and vocabulary-related concepts =

== Higher-level categories and vocabulary mappings ==

The background, IOOS use, and mappings of these vocabularies is partially described in [#References (1)]. Though this has not been discussed at length, terms from these vocabularies may become useful as service Keywords and for other data-discovery uses.
  * [http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/core_variable IOOS Core Variable Vocabulary]. "The 26 core variables"
  * [http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/societal_areas IOOS Societal Benefit Areas]
  * [http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/category IOOS Category Vocabulary]

== Units of Measure ==

Units of Measure are not actually a vocabulary per se, but are rather a mix of vocabulary terms and syntax for combinations. At this time, IOOS encourages but does not require the use of [http://unitsofmeasure.org/ UCUM] or [http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/udunits/ UDUNITS]. Versions should be kept in mind (eg, UDUNITS-1 vs UDUNITS-2). [http://coastwatch.pfeg.noaa.gov/erddap/convert/units.html ERDDAP / NOAA CoastWatch has a very useful page that compares UDUNITS and UCUM, and includes converters among the units systems, and a discussion of UDUNITS-1 and UDUNITS-2]. Another effort to watch for is [http://www.qudt.org/ QUDT], previously sponsored by NASA; Simon Cox (of O&M fame) is now involved in this, in some way.


== IOOS Biology Data projects ==

  * [http://www.ioos.noaa.gov/dmac/biology/welcome.html Biological Data Terminology]
  * [http://www.ioos.noaa.gov/observing/animal_telemetry/welcome.html Animal Telemetry Network, ATN]

Hassan Moustahfid from the IOOS PO led a project with three agencies in Hawaii aimed at developing a common exchange data format for exchanging reef fish survey data (presence, absence, abundance of reef fish as determined by visual sampling procedures).  A large part of that development involved agreeing on vocabularies to be used by all three agencies.  The solution was an extension of the Darwin Core standard for biological observations and was developed in conjunction with OBIS USA.  
[http://www.ioos.gov/ecosystem_observations/welcome.html Click Projects tab on this page]
How do we use this?  Is it extensible?  What about the overlap with existing standards like CF and the IOOS Param Voc?  

Biodiversity Information Standards (formerly known as Taxonomic Data Working Group) http://www.tdwg.org/

Schema Terminology will be based on ratified [http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/ Darwin core], Dublin core and proposed IOOS vocabularies. XML guide will also based on Darwin core XML guidance.

  * CF Conventions had been applied to biological data definition at the field level. This is to assure that IOOS Biological Project will be compatible with other geophysical datasets.
  * FGDC and ISO 19115-2 are the adopted Metadata standards.
  * ERDDAP is the main webservice for this project.
  * EDC is the client developed to connect directly to ERDDAP and access data using customer application tools such as ARCGIS and R Project.
  * To learn more about the Biological data standards implemented at the Pacific Islands Region please follow the following links:
Biological data services at the Pacific Islands Region website
FGDC and ISO Metadata



= References and Additional Materials =

(1) Haines, S., V. Subramanian, E. Mayorga, D. Snowden, R. Ragsdale, C. Rueda and M. Howard. _Submitted_. IOOS vocabulary and ontology strategy for observed properties. [http://www.oceans12mtsieeehamptonroads.org Proc. MTS/IEEE Oceans 2012], Hampton Roads, VA. Final, submitted paper [http://ioostech.googlecode.com/files/IOOSVocabPaper_MTSOceans2012_HainesEtal_Final_copyrighted.pdf is available here as pdf.]

(2) [https://marinemetadata.org/news/mmisemanticpaper2011 Graybeal, J., A. W. Isenor, and C. Rueda. 2012. Semantic mediation of vocabularies for ocean observing systems. Computers & Geosciences 40: 120-131, doi:10.1016/j.cageo.2011.08.002]

__(There will also be a link here to a new suplementary page of non-essential background information, including everything listed below)__

----

= BACKGROUND MATERIALS TO BE DELETED OR MOVED TO A SUPPLEMENTARY PAGE =

None of this material is essential or directly useful to IOOS users of this main vocabulary page.

== IOOS Vars RDF ==

Dictionaries and Ontologies, such as those hosted at MMI allow machine mapping's between controlled vocabularies.  The IOOS Catalog adopted a simple Ontology which allows the User Interface to map IOOS variables, e.g. Winds to the CF Terms used by some of the regional SOS's.  This is a very simple ontology, see below, which only makes use of the NarrowMatch triple store's thus Winds is mapped to wind_speed, wind_direction, etc.  [ControlledVocabularyTables#IOOS_Vars_RDF See the XML listing here.]

== Existing Observed Property Vocabularies ==

|| Controlled Vocabulary || URL for information || URL for reference ||
|| Climate and Forecast Standard Names || http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/ and http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/documents/cf-standard-names/ || http://mmisw.org/ont/cf/parameter/PROPERTYNAME ||
|| IOOS Parameter Vocabulary v1.0 || ?? || http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/parameter/PROPERTYNAME ||
|| IOOS DIF GML Dictionary || ?? || http://www.ioos.gov/gml/IOOS/0.6.1/dictionaries/phenomenaDictionary.xml#PROPERTYNAME  ||
|| SWEET || http://sweet.jpl.nasa.gov/ || http://sweet.jpl.nasa.gov/2.2/VOCAB.owl#PROPERTYNAME ||
|| OGC Terms (URL) || ?? || ?? ||
|| OGC Terms (URN) || ?? || ogc:def:phenomenon:mmisw.org:cf:PROPERTYNAME || 
|| GCOOS || ?? || http://mmisw.org/ont/gcoos/parameter/ ||
|| SECOORA || ?? || http://mmisw.org/ont/secoora/parameter/ ||

A list of tables with examples of how the various observed property vocabularies are used across example services can be found on the [ControlledVocabularyTables ControlledVocabularyTables Page]

== External resources of interest ==
 * [http://www.eionet.europa.eu/gemet/ GEMET (GEneral Multilingual Environmental Thesaurus) ]
 * [http://gcmd.nasa.gov/Resources/valids/archives/keyword_list.html NASA GCMD (Global Change Master Directory) Science keywords ]
 * [http://www.scgcorp.com/urr/LexViewList.aspx GEOSS EO parameters ]
 * NASA SWEET (Semantic Web for Earth and Environmental Terminology)
 * [http://gmesdata.esa.int/OTE/navigateInfoDomain GMES Thesaurus ]
 * CF resources on MMI. I've found several pages and resources at MMI that are directly focused on CF, but may not be well integrated or cross-linked and have different degrees of currency (out of date).
    * [http://marinemetadata.org/references/cfstandardnames CF - Climate and Forecast Standard Names; Vocabulary for CF parameters] (a document, not a vocabulary resource per se)
    * [http://marinemetadata.org/community/teams/vocdev/generaldocuments/orrcf Using the ORR CF Standard names Vocabulary]
    * [http://mmisw.org/ont/cf/parameter Climate and Forecast (CF) standard names parameter vocabulary]

== Other, Various potentially useful resources==
  * Work on water quality (?) vocabularies that Matt Howard and Cyndy Chandler are starting up (no URL that I know of). Matt is also leading a vocabulary effort focused on Gulf of Mexico, related to Deepwater Horizon recovery efforts.
  * [http://www.bco-dmo.org/ BCO-DMO] and [http://cdmo.baruch.sc.edu/ NERRS CDMO] are also excellent resources for water quality and biogeochemistry. [http://cdmo.baruch.sc.edu/data/parameters.cfm For NERRS, this "Parameters" page is very relevant].
  * [https://geo-ide.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php?title=In-situ_data_%28sensors,_groups_of_sensors,_platforms,_etc.%29 (Geo-IDE Wiki) In-situ data (sensors, groups of sensors, platforms, etc.)]
  * [http://www.bodc.ac.uk/products/web_services/vocab/ British Oceanographic Data Center (BODC) NERC Vocabulary Server]. 
  * [http://www.seadatanet.org/ SeaDataNet (European project)] Device Categories vocabulary, [http://vocab.ndg.nerc.ac.uk/list/L05/current served from the BODC NERC]
  * [http://www.seadatanet.org/Standards-Software/Common-Vocabularies SeaDataNet Common Vocabularies]
  * Probably resources at IODE/IOC
  * The work on an IOOS Non-Federal Asset Inventory in mid 2011 (previously led by Sam Walker) also used some relevant semi-controlled vocabularies; these should be examined.
  * [http://data.nodc.noaa.gov/geoportal/ New NODC Geoportal]. Potentially it may use relevant controlled vocabularies that could facilitate wider discovery across IOOS, NODC, etc?
  * [http://cdi.gleon.org/ GLEON-CDI] (lakes). A [http://gleon.org/gleon-bb/viewtopic.php?f=3&t=18#p58 GLEON CV Excel spreadsheet is mentioned and linked to in this 2010 forum thread]
  * [http://www.citeulike.org/user/emayorga/tag/ioos,informatics My CiteULike collection of peer-reviewed journal articles broadly related to this topic]

==CMSP Discovery Vocabularies Workshop==

December 1-3, 2010, at WHOI (With USGS/NOAA sponsorship)
http://www.whoi.edu/page.do?pid=49656
Workshop report is available from the page above or directly from http://www.whoi.edu/fileserver.do?id=77984&pt=2&p=84468

There was useful information gathered prior to the meeting and included in the appendices of the report on existing Crosswalks, Repositories, Metadtaa Standards, Tools, and Vocabularies in use.  Most important for IOOS, are some firm recommendations on how to choose vocabularies and the importance of a mature process for extending/updating vocabularies when they do not meet our exact needs.  