== Overview ==

This page will serve to provide best practices on data archiving following guidance from the National Oceanographic Data Center (NODC). The NODC requirements for data submission are illustrated in the example of an NDBC completed NODC Submission Information Form (SIF). The NODC SIF example is presented here for you to follow. Presently, NODC is working with SECOORA and MARACOOS on pilot project related to data archive submission. Thus, the guidance on data submission will evolve.  But for now, we want to be able to provide the best information available.  Steve Rutz, the NODC Observing System Team Lead will give a brief on July 17th, 2012 RA IOOS monthly conference call about the archiving data process.

Below is the introduction and instructions excerpted from the NODC SIF.  The full SIF document is accessible from http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/downloads/detail?name=SIF_NDBC_CMANWX_Ver7_01_11.docx&can=2&q=


== NODC SIF Introduction ==

The NODC SIF Following the definitions and principles of the Open Archival Information System (OAIS) Reference Model (ISO 14721:2003), this form documents the mutual understanding between a Producer, defined as a person or organization who provides information to be preserved, and an Archive, defined as the organization that intends to preserve information for access and use over the long term.  It should accompany all data submissions to the National Oceanographic Data Center (NODC) and be completed to the extent possible.  

The information contained on this form may be used to:

1.  Populate NODC’s Accession Tracking Data Base and product-specific databases
2.  Create metadata records conforming to the Content Standard for Digital Geospatial Metadata (CSDGM), Vers. 2 (FGDC-STD-001-1998) and/or ISO 19115
3.  Generate a formal archive appraisal package, for submissions requiring management level approval
4.  Develop a list of Producer requirements requested of the Archive

The information contained on this form is true and correct to the best understanding of the Producer and Archive at the time of its submission. In the future, this information may be amended, updated, or revised as necessary and some submissions may require management level approvals before archival services can be provided.   

===Instructions:===

This form is divided into six sections.  Section 1 provides only the most basic Tracking Information and is the only section absolutely required at the time of submission.  However, within 1 month all submissions must also include information for Section 2, which provides basic Data Discovery and Usage Information, and all submissions should strive to provide information through Sections 3 and 4, which provide more comprehensive and detailed information on the data set and its requirements for long term stewardship.  Section 5 is required for submissions to the Archive that are expected to be periodic or routine in nature, and supports automation of archival services.  Section 6 is optional and is only required for submissions that are expected to need management level approval and a formal archive appraisal package.  The Archive Point of Contact will provide guidance as needed on all of these questions and will work with the Producer to ensure both parties reach a mutual understanding.

When complete, please email the signed form (see the last page of the document) to the Archive Point of Contact with a copy to NODC.DataOfficer@noaa.gov.  Closing the email with “Signed,” followed by your name is an acceptable form of signature.