#summary Dumping ground for Derrick's half baked ideas and TODO items.

 # We desperately need to document the completion of what we called milestone 1.0.  Like it or not NDBC, CO-OPS, Axiom, and ASA are already coding.  Without a concerted effort to focus on the templates in the next week or so (say 25 Oct) the code will be complete and the decision will be made for us.  
  # Need a page describing milestone 1 at a high level and pointing to the templates in the source repo.  Does anyone know if we can freeze the svn repo?  
  # Need to update the issue tracker to include milestone 1.1 and 2.0 in the data entry fields (Derrick will complete)
  # Need a page to collect ideas about 1.1 and 2.0 and generally lay out the big issues.
  # Finalize the issue tracker and move all incomplete 1.0 issues into 1.1.
  # 
 # Reorganize, cull, rename, and refine the wiki.
  # We need the wiki to be somewhat self explanatory and readable by someone outside of the RI team.  In my mind this refinement includes
  # Remove redundant pages and consolidate different versions of like pages into one page 
  # Decide the overall scope of this wiki.  Originally we intended it to be a relatively short lived resource for project teams.  I think we're past that and this wiki should become a technical documentation resource.  I believe our choice is to make this wiki about SOS and the technologies directly related to SOS (e.g. vocabularies), or about all things DMAC.  This latter scope would then include some broad statements about the overall architecture, client information, info on other data access services like the various flavors of DAP, and WMS etc.  I think we need a place to collect these types of details that are firm but stop just short of policy.  It should identify RAs as unique participants in IOOS but not be designed exclusively for RAs.
  # Clarify and organize the many pages related to the feature types and their serialization in CF netCDF and SWE.  Two types of pages have emerged for each feature type presently.  One for the netCDF type of information and another for the SWE templates.  The info in both is incomplete and out of date.  I suggest we remove these pages, consolidate a few of the still relevant links and then point to the source repo as the definitive guide to the SWE serialization and leave CF/netCDF as pointers to other sites like NODC.
  # 

 # Need a plan to document/address the units of measure issue.  There is conflicting guidance and IOOS doesn't seem to have a stated position yet.
   # How do you reference different uom vocabularies within the various types of files, e.g. GetCapabilities response and a netcdf file.
   # Update the DescribeSensor page to reflect the outcome of the Baltimore workshop including adding links to the templates Kyle started in the source repo.
 # Track the complete set of outstanding actions that pop up usu through the course of email discussion.  The urge to get services implemented is pushing the finalization of the templates and we are losing track of issues.  This was supposed to be done with the issues function on the wiki but we need a way to track these better.
 # IOOS and/or provider specific disclaimer.  Suggest this is a provider issue initially.
 # Mike Garcia asked about encoding wave spectra information.  We need a better strategy for this and a way to include the expertise of CDIP and the netCDF feature folks at NODC who are currently working with CDIP to archive their data.
 # 