#summary Examples and links to information on the SensorML response to the DescribeSensor request for SOS.
#labels Phase-Requirements,Phase-Design,SOS,Metadata


<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />


=Request=

The attributes of the DescribeSensor request are detailed in the Table 3 of the Sensor Observation Service specification 1.0 ([https://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=26667 OGC 06-009r6]).

|| *Parameter* || *Name* || *Definition	Data type and Values* || *Multiplicity and Use of the Parameter* ||
||request||	Operation name||	DescribeSensor||	One (mandatory)||
||procedure||	Is the process or sensor system, for which the description is to be returned. It could be an observing system, platform or a simple device, such as a bin. This value must match the value advertised in the xlink:href attribute of a procedure element advertised in the SOS GetCapabilities response. In the SOS specification it is referred as SensorID (Table 3). ||	anyURI	One (mandatory)||
||service||	Service type identifier ||	SOS||	One (mandatory)||
||version||	Specification version of the SOS accepted by client	||1.0.0 has format X.Y.Z||	One (mandatory)||
||outputFormat||	Specifies the desire output format.||	text/xml;subtype=sensorML/1.0.1	|| One (mandatory)||


=Response=

The following templates show very DRAFT examples of desirable sensor/platform/network descriptions.  These templates are not finalized.

 * Sensor description [http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/source/browse/trunk/templates/1.0/DescribeSensor/DescribeSensor-Sensor.xml DescribeSensor-Sensor.xml]
 * Network description [http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/source/browse/trunk/templates/1.0/DescribeSensor/DescribeSensor-Network.xml DescribeSensor-Network.xml ]
 * Platform description (time series at a point) [http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/source/browse/trunk/templates/1.0/DescribeSensor/DescribeSensor-TimeSeries.xml DescribeSensor-TimeSeries.xml]
 * Platform description (trajectory from a glider) [http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/source/browse/trunk/templates/1.0/DescribeSensor/DescribeSensor-Trajectory.xml DescribeSensor-Trajectory.xml]

=Examples =
 * IOOS Examples or Guidance [DescribeSensorMetadataForIOOSSOS]
 * Oostethys Examples http://code.google.com/p/oostethys/source/browse/trunk/component/server/perl/difDescribeSensor.xml?r=517
 * OGC Resources http://www.ogcnetwork.net/search/node/sensorml
 * OGC Resources https://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=45897

== Q2O: QARTOD to OGC ==

Project home page is here.  http://q2o.whoi.edu/  One key idea relevant to the SensorML discussion is that Q2O has separated the platform/sensor metadata into two or more hierarchies based on the time scale in which the metadata is updated.  They can be referenced from within through xlinks.  For example, the _OEM_ file, or Original Equipment Manufacturer file, contains static metadata for a sensor that represents metadata that a) never changes and/or b) represents the factory defaults (these may change through time).  A second file, is a time dependent _Deployment_ file that contains metadata relevant to a particular deployment of the sensor in the environment.  I think this is an idea worth pursuing.

== Marine Metadata Initiative ==

Go to http://marinemetadata.org and search sensorml, there are many resources.

Additionally, Carlos Rueda at MMI has been working on a web service to create SensorML documents.  I don't know how capable it is but according to his comments on the SensorML mailing list he has been working on it lately (Oct 2011).  I hope this means that he's willing to engage if we have questions and possibly even respond to requests.  http://mmisw.org/smlmor/ 