#summary From Emilio: Some pointers, links and initial thoughts on Controlled Vocabularies
#labels NANOOS,Vocabularies,SensorML

*Table of Content*
<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

== My To-Do's for this page ==

Reorganize this page into a listing of types of vocabularies to be addressed, and where in SOS they are relevant (GetCapabilities, SensorML, etc): 
  * Observed variables
  * platform/asset types
  * [RepresentingRolesinServiceMetadata roles]
  * regions
  * Regional Association codes/identifiers
  * etc

== Introduction ==

My intent here is to complement the [ControlledVocabularies more official page on Controlled Vocabularies] elsewhere on this wiki, without adding my clutter to that page.

The SURA Modeling Testbed tool at http://testbedwww.sura.org/model-dev/ has a really interesting combination of models and data (I think) where controlled vocabularies for measurements are used. It's worth assessing these, chatting with people in that team (ASA, Kyle Wilcox??), etc. For example, it's clear to me that while many/most of the names used are in fact CF standard names, many must be made up, but using CF recommendations for building names. 

That's a general approach that we've discussed and that I think we should follow: use CF when an appropriate parameter exist; provide a nimble, IOOS-controlled vocabulary on MMI for parameters not yet on the CF list, striving to follow CF naming patterns for these new parameters, and abundant documentation: names, definitions, linkages to other relevant vocabularies (such as those from [http://qwwebservices.usgs.gov/service-domains.html#CROSSWALK USGS], [http://his.cuahsi.org/mastercvreg.html CUAHSI]), most common units, etc; we have a great starting point already, in the form of the "IOOS-specific parameter vocabularies on MMI" I've listed below. For existing CF parameters, there's sometimes ambiguity and apparent redundancy; we can also provide guidance on preferred parameters, when such ambiguity exists (eg, for barometric pressure).

Other ontologies / controlled vocabularies (some less controlled than others...) directly relevant to IOOS DMAC:
  # *CF resources on MMI*. I've found several pages and resources at MMI that are directly focused on CF, but may not be well integrated or cross-linked and have different degrees of currency (out of date).
    * [http://marinemetadata.org/references/cfstandardnames CF - Climate and Forecast Standard Names; Vocabulary for CF parameters] (a document, not a vocabulary resource per se)
    * [http://marinemetadata.org/community/teams/vocdev/generaldocuments/orrcf Using the ORR CF Standard names Vocabulary]
    * [http://mmisw.org/ont/cf/parameter Climate and Forecast (CF) standard names parameter vocabulary]
  # *IOOS-specific parameter vocabularies on MMI*
    * [http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/parameter IOOS Parameter Vocabulary V.1.0]
    * [http://mmisw.org/ont/secoora/parameter SECOORA Parameter Vocabulary]
    * [http://mmisw.org/ont/gcoos/parameter GCOOS Vocabulary]

== Organization Roles (esp. Provider/Owner) ==

  * [https://groups.google.com/d/msg/ioostech_dev/aAsiZta7mVs/WUfVKMalZf0J Relevant discussion thread from ioostech_dev, from Oct 2011 (_Institution roles in SOS & IOOS Catalog: "Organization" vs "Data Provider"_)]
  * _Describe convention used by Eric in the IOOS Catalog, and also [NANOOSNVSPythonSOS adopted by the NANOOS SOS service]_ It's the name from XPath /sml:member/sml:System/sml:contact/sml:ResponsibleParty/sml:organizationName, but I can't remember which "contactType role" is being used (eg, <sml:contact xlink:role="urn:ogc:def:classifiers:OGC:contactType:owner"> below) when multiple roles are listed in the response.

Example:
{{{
<sml:contact xlink:role="urn:ogc:def:classifiers:OGC:contactType:owner">
    <sml:ResponsibleParty>
        <sml:organizationName>ORCA-UW</sml:organizationName>
        <sml:contactInfo>
            <sml:address>
                <sml:country>USA</sml:country>
            </sml:address>
            <sml:onlineResource xlink:href="http://orca.ocean.washington.edu" />
        </sml:contactInfo>
    </sml:ResponsibleParty>
</sml:contact>
}}}

== Platform/Station types ==

Document existing practices and options regarding controlled vocabularies for "platform types" in SensorML DescribeSensor responses. [http://mmisw.org/ont/mmi/platform/ MMI vocabulary]. Note the use of Classification terms from http://mmisw.org/ont/mmi/platform/ . Consequences for IOOS Catalog, including the use of NVS asset-type map icons.

Station Classifiers (in sml:classification/sml:ClassifierList) used in the NANOOS SOS as a draft incomplete implementation, borrowing from either NDBC or NOS/COOPS and possibly others:
{{{
<sml:classifier name="System Type Identifier">
    <sml:Term definition="urn:ioos:def:classifier:NOAA::systemTypeID">
        <sml:codeSpace xlink:href="http://mmisw.org/ont/mmi/platform/" />
        <sml:value>Platform</sml:value>
    </sml:Term>
</sml:classifier>
<sml:classifier name="Platform Type">
    <sml:Term definition="urn:ioos:def:classifier:NOAA:platformType">
        <sml:codeSpace xlink:href="http://nvs.nanoos.org"/>
        <sml:value>MOORED BUOY</sml:value>
    </sml:Term>
</sml:classifier>
}}}

A question I've had about this implementation is, _what the heck is "urn:ioos:def:classifier:NOAA:" referring to?_ I know these urn's don't have to correspond to anything that's documented (much less actual URL's), but are these instances referring to anything that's been discussed or decided before?

=== Other relevant resources ===
  * Work on water quality (?) vocabularies that Matt Howard and Cyndy Chandler are starting up (no URL that I know of). Matt is also leading a vocabulary effort focused on Gulf of Mexico, related to Deepwater Horizon recovery efforts.
  * [http://www.bco-dmo.org/ BCO-DMO] and [http://cdmo.baruch.sc.edu/ NERRS CDMO] are also excellent resources for water quality and biogeochemistry. [http://cdmo.baruch.sc.edu/data/parameters.cfm For NERRS, this "Parameters" page is very relevant].
  * [https://geo-ide.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php?title=In-situ_data_%28sensors,_groups_of_sensors,_platforms,_etc.%29 (Geo-IDE Wiki) In-situ data (sensors, groups of sensors, platforms, etc.)]
  * [http://www.bodc.ac.uk/products/web_services/vocab/ British Oceanographic Data Center (BODC) NERC Vocabulary Server]. 
  * [http://www.seadatanet.org/ SeaDataNet (European project)] Device Categories vocabulary, [http://vocab.ndg.nerc.ac.uk/list/L05/current served from the BODC NERC]
  * [http://www.seadatanet.org/Standards-Software/Common-Vocabularies SeaDataNet Common Vocabularies]
  * SeaDataNet Common Vocabularies
    * [http://seadatanet.maris2.nl/v_bodc_vocab/search.asp?name=(L06)%20SeaVoX+Platform+Categories&l=L06 L06 SeaVoX Platform Categories]
    * [http://seadatanet.maris2.nl/v_bodc_vocab/search.asp?name=(L061)%20SeaVoX+Platform+Classes&l=L061 L061 SeaVoX Platform Classes]
    * [http://seadatanet.maris2.nl/v_bodc_vocab/search.asp?name=(L062)%20SeaVoX+Platform+Class+Categories&l=L062 L062 SeaVoX Platform Class Categories]
  * Probably resources at IODE/IOC
  * The work on an IOOS Non-Federal Asset Inventory in early-mid 2011 (previously led by Sam Walker) also used some relevant semi-controlled vocabularies; these should be examined.
  * [http://cdi.gleon.org/ GLEON-CDI] (lakes). A [http://gleon.org/gleon-bb/viewtopic.php?f=3&t=18#p58 GLEON CV Excel spreadsheet is mentioned and linked to in this 2010 forum thread]
  * [http://www.citeulike.org/user/emayorga/tag/ioos,informatics My CiteULike collection of peer-reviewed journal articles broadly related to this topic]

=== NANOOS NVS Asset types and icons ===
_Note to self_: Describe and make the [http://nvs.nanoos.org NVS] asset/platform-type map icons available through this wiki later on.