#summary References and Useful External Links for use across the wiki

<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />

=Resources= 
== Example Files ==
http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/source/browse/ndbc_swe_sample-2011-10-19.xml NDBC example of temperature observations from a collection of moored buoys.  There are several other examples in the source repository now [http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/source/browse/]

== Reference Docs (Discussion Papers and Specifications) ==
http://external.opengis.org/twiki_public/NREwg/GMESPHInstrumentCapabilities

http://external.opengis.org/twiki_public/HydrologyDWG/SOSServingWaterML20

http://opengeo.org/publications/opengeo-swe/

http://opengeo.org/publications/opengeo-swe/OpenGeo-SWE.pdf

http://code.google.com/p/swe-common-data-framework/

http://cf-pcmdi.llnl.gov/documents/cf-conventions/1.6/cf-conventions.html#id36261967

http://external.opengis.org/twiki_public/NREwg/SWECommonNetCDFTutorial

Quality Control: http://q2o.whoi.edu

http://dl.dropbox.com/u/8611634/swe2011/swe2011_submission_9.pdf

Emilio's online IOOS bibliography [http://www.citeulike.org/user/emayorga/tag/ioos,informatics at CiteULike]

Jirka, S., and C. Stasch.  Concept for a Lightweight SWE Profile.  Accessed 01 February 2012 from [http://external.opengis.org/twiki_public/pub/HydrologyDWG/SOSUsageAndServerTypeDiscussion/Lightweight_SWE_Profile_Draft.pdf Concept for a Lightweight SWE Profile URL]

Bermudez, L., T. Cook, et al. (2009). Web feature service (WFS) and sensor observation service (SOS) comparison to publish time series data, IEEE.  [http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/Xplore/login.jsp?url=http%3A%2F%2Fieeexplore.ieee.org%2Fstamp%2Fstamp.jsp%3Ftp%3D%26arnumber%3D5067460&authDecision=-203 Abstract]

Botts, M., G. Percivall, et al. (2008). OGC Sensor Web Enablement: Overview and High Level Architecture. GeoSensor Networks. N. Silvia, L. Alexandros and S. Anthony, Springer-Verlag: 175-190.  DOI:10.1007/978-3-540-79996-2_10 

Bröring, A., J. Echterhoff, et al. (2011). "New Generation Sensor Web Enablement." Sensors 11(3): 2652-2699.  DOI:doi:10.3390/s110302652 http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/11/3/2652/

Consortium, O. G. (2007). OpenGIS® Sensor Model Language (SensorML) Implementation Specification, Open Geospatial Consortium. http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=21273

Consortium, O. G. (2007). OpenGIS® SensorML Encoding Standard, version 1.0 Schema - Corrigendum 1, Open Geospatial Consortium. http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=24757

Consortium, O. G. (2007). Sensor Observation Service 1.0, Open Geospatial Consortium: 104. http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=26667

Consortium, O. G. (2011). Observations and Measurements - XML Implementation V2.0, Open Geospatial Consortium. http://www.opengis.net/doc/IS/OMXML/2.0

Consortium, O. G. (2011). OGC SWE Common Data Model Encoding Standard, Open Geospatial Consortium. http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=41157

Consortium, O. G. (2011). OpenGIS® SWE Service Model Implementation Standard, Open Geospatial Consortium. http://www.opengis.net/doc/IS/SWES/2.0 or [http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/%3fartifact_id=38476 SWE Service Model v2.0]

Hankin, S. C., J. D. Blower, et al. (2009). NetCDF-CF-OPeNDAP: Standards for Ocean Data Interoperability and Object Lessons for Community Data Standards Processes. OceanObs09. Venice, Italy. 

Janowicz, K., A. Bröring, et al. (2011). "A RESTful proxy and data model for linked sensor data." International Journal of Digital Earth: 1-22.  DOI:10.1080/17538947.2011.614698 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17538947.2011.614698

Mazzetti, P., S. Nativi, et al. (2009). "RESTful implementation of geospatial services for Earth and Space Science applications." International Journal of Digital Earth 2(sup1): 40-61.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17538940902866153 doi:10.1080/17538940902866153]

Na, A. and M. Priest (2007). Sensor Observation Service Version 1.0. O. G. C. Inc. 1.0: 90. http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=26667

Nativi, S., J. Caron, et al. (2008). "Unidata’s Common Data Model mapping to the ISO 19123 Data Model." Earth Science Informatics 1(2): 59-78. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12145-008-0011-6 doi:10.1007/s12145-008-0011-6]

Sheth, A., C. Henson, et al. (2008). "Semantic sensor web." IEEE Internet Computing: 78-83.  

Tamayo, A., P. Viciano, et al. (2011). Empirical Study of Sensor Observation Services Server Instances
Advancing Geoinformation Science for a Changing World. S. Geertman, W. Reinhardt and F. Toppen, Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 1: 185-209.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-19789-5_10 doi:10.1007/978-3-642-19789-5_10]

Zyl, T. L. v., I. Simonis, et al. (2009). "The Sensor Web: systems of sensor systems." International Journal of Digital Earth 2(1): 16-30.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17538940802439549 doi:10.1080/17538940802439549]