==*IOOS Reference Implementation Working Group Meeting (Tentative)*==

=== Introduction ===

A small team of IOOS RA DMAC Coordinators are working on development of a reference implementation for SOS for use by the IOOS community.  The meeting will be focused on the development process.  The agenda and specific details are forthcoming.  

=== Logistics ===

===Presently, the *tentative* meeting dates will be late January or early February:=== 

  * Last week of January; or 

  * 1st or 2nd week of February

===The *tentative* meeting location is:===

  * Atlanta, Georgia

===Additional logistics are being sorted by the IOOS Program Office and will be provided as they develop.===    