#summary References and information for use in developing a platform vocabulary.
#labels Phase-Design

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

= Introduction =
 
The Platform Vocabulary is being developed to give oceanographic data users consistent terminology to use for their data sets.  The Platform Vocabulary is an essential part of fulfilling the development of the IOOS SOS templates.  However, version 1.0 of the templates were complete without final guidance on the controlled vocabulary used in the templates to describe platformType.  This was unavoidable as we had to make progress.  The immediate goal is to complete the platform vocabulary before release of the version 1.1 and it is expected the vocabulary will be resolved before that.  For the record, Emilio, John Ten Hoeve, Rob R. and Sara Haines, to date, have been most active in developing the vocabulary.  If you are interested please, contact Rob Ragsdale (Rob.Ragsdale@noaa.gov) or John Ten Hoeve (John.tenhoeve@noaa.gov).  

{{{
<sml:classifier name="platformType">
   <sml:Term definition="http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/definition/platformType">
      <sml:codeSpace xlink:href="http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/platform"/>
      <sml:value>MOORED BUOY</sml:value>
   </sml:Term>
</sml:classifier>
}}}
The vocabulary at http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/platform does not yet exist.

= Platform Vocabulary Use Cases =
IOOS has drafted use cases to help derive requirements for the IOOS Platform Vocabulary.  These use cases are draft examples and include an initial set of guidelines for the vocabulary.   

  # The Program Office has a requirement to report assets in broad categories (e.g. buoys, HF radars, fixed stations near or on the coasts) for data calls and budgetary reports.  The platform vocabulary should be hierarchical so that the assets may be reported according to few large classes (less than 10).
  # Definitions for the platform vocabulary must be prescriptive to avoid misclassification.  In the previous version of the IOOS Asset Inventory, similar assets were assigned different platforms across the Regional Associations.  
  # If sensor information is not populated in the appropriate fields in sensorML, this sensor information may have to be provided in the platform vocabulary.  For example, a CTD may be on a vessel or a shore station, but if that information probably will not be included in the sensor metadata, then it may have to be included in some way iin the platform vocabulary.  Webcams are another good example of this.
  # The platform vocabulary must be able to handle mixed platforms (combined shore sensors measuring water temperature and met sensors measuring wind speed). Maybe this isn’t really a mixed platform and is instead should be called “Fixed Station”?
  # If a hierarchical structure is used for the vocabulary, the platform must be able to be uniquely identified using the MMI framework, and the structure should be transparent.  For example, if wave buoy is a subclass of buoy, and the Platform Type is listed as wave buoy, then the XPath provided should direct you to a page where wave buoy is noted as a subclass of buoy.  

= Platform Vocabulary Guidelines =
  # No capitalization
  # No acronyms (High Frequency Radar)
  # A procedure is described for how the hierarchy is structured.  

=SPARQL Queries=

Example SPARQL queries created by Sara Haines (SECOORA/UNC-CH) have been show vocab hierarchies and mappings to other vocabularies.  

In general, SPARQL queries can be done against the MMI Ontology Registry and Repository (ORR)SPARQL endpoint at http://mmisw.org/ont/?sparql using HTTP GET and POST requests.

A web based [http://mmisw.org/ont/sparql.html form] is accessible on the MMI Website for submitting SPARQL queries.

===Example Queries===

===Find IOOS parameters that have exactMatch or closeMatch to CF terms===

PREFIX ioos: <http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/parameter/>
SELECT DISTINCT ?parameter ?definition ?unit ?property ?value 
WHERE {?parameter a ioos:Parameter .
       ?parameter ?property ?value .
       ?parameter ioos:Term ?term . 
       ?parameter ioos:Definition ?definition . 
       ?parameter ioos:Units ?unit .
       FILTER (regex(str(?property), "(exactMatch|closeMatch)", "i") && regex(str(?value), "cf", "i") )} 
ORDER BY ?parameter
 
===Grouped by List all matches between IOOS parameters and CF terms===
PREFIX ioos: <http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/parameter/>
SELECT DISTINCT ?cat ?parameter ?property ?value 
WHERE {?parameter a ioos:Parameter .
       ?parameter ?property ?value .
       ?cat skos:narrowMatch ?parameter .
       FILTER  (regex(str(?property), "Match", "i") && regex(str(?value), "cf", "i") )
      } 
ORDER BY ?cat ?parameter

===List all Categories===
PREFIX ioos: <http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/category/>
SELECT ?p 
WHERE {?p a ioos:Category .
      } 
ORDER BY ?p

===List all Core Variables===
PREFIX ioos: <http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos/core_variable/>
SELECT ?p 
WHERE {?p a ioos:Core_Variable .
      } 
ORDER BY ?p

===List Platform Terms===
PREFIX ioos: <http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos_test/platform/>
SELECT DISTINCT ?cat ?platform ?definition
WHERE {?platform a ioos:Platform .
       ?platform ioos:Definition ?definition .
       ?cat skos:narrowMatch ?platform .
      } 
ORDER BY ?cat ?platform

===List Platform Categories===
PREFIX ioos: <http://mmisw.org/ont/ioos_test/platform_category/>
SELECT DISTINCT ?p 
WHERE {?p a ioos:Platform .
      } 
ORDER BY ?p

==Proposed Hierarchical structure==
A hierarchical structure has been proposed for the Platform Vocabulary in order meet reporting requirements, for example from the IOOS Asset Inventory or IOOS Catalog.  Here is an example to provide context to this proposal: 

|| Platform Type            || Subclass                 || Subclass ||
|| Animal                   || Fish                     || Tuna     ||
||                          ||                          || Shark    ||
||                          || Mammal                   || Whale    ||
|| Buoy                     || Moored Buoy              ||          ||  
||                          || Moored Profiling Buoy    ||          ||
||                          || Drifting Buoy            ||          ||
||                          || Drifting Profiling Buoy  ||          ||
||                          || Wave Buoy                ||          ||
|| Cabled Array             || Subclass                 ||          ||
|| Camera                   || IR Camera                ||          ||
||                          || Webcam                   ||          || 
|| Fixed Drilling Platform  ||                          ||          ||
|| Fixed Station            || Station                  || Dock     ||
||                          ||                          || Pier    ||   
||                          ||                          || Tower    ||
||                          || Fixed Inland Station     || Tower    ||
||                          ||                          || Roof     ||  
||                          || Fixed Off-shore Station  || Tower    ||  
||                          ||                          || Mooring  || 
|| Radar                    ||                          ||          ||
|| Sampling Location        ||                          ||          ||
|| Satellite                ||                          ||          ||
|| Vehicle                  || Aircraft                 ||          ||
||                          || Autonomous Underwater Vehicle ||     || 
||                          || Glider                   ||          ||
||                          || Towed Vehicle            ||          ||
||                          || Vehicle                  ||          ||
||                          || Vessel                   ||          ||

= List of IOOS Platform Vocabulary Terms =
This is the complete list of IOOS Platform Vocabulary Terms used in the 2011 IOOS Asset Inventory.  

|| Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler            ||
|| Acoustic System ||
|| ADCP||
||ADCP (SELF-CONTAINED)||
||ADCP Profiler||
||AIRCRAFT||
||AIS||
||AUV||
||BUOY||
||CABLED ARRAY||
||Coastal Met||
||Coastal Wave/Met||
||CTD||
||CTD/MET||
||Doppler Radar||
||DRIFTER||
||Drifter||
||Drifter Buoy||
||Field Station||
||FIXED BOTTOM STATION||
||FIXED MET STATION||
||FIXED SHORE STATION||
||FIXED TIDE GAGE||
||FIXED WQ STATION||
||GLIDER||
||HF Radar||
||Ice Profiling Sonar||
||IR Camera||
||Met Station||
||MOORING||
||OTHER||
||OTHER - TOWED VEHICLE||
||Passive Acoustic Recorder||
||PIER||
||PRESSURE SENSOR||
||Research Ship||
||RIB Boat||
||ROV||
||Sailing Vessel||
||SeaBird CTD||
||SL ADCP Profiler||
||SMAST Pier||
||SODAR||
||Subsurface Mooring||
||SUB-SURFACE MOORING||
||Tide Gauge||
||TOWER||
||UUV||
||VEHICLE||
||VESSEL||
||WATER LEVEL STATION||
||Wave Buoy||
||Weather Stations||
||X-band Radar||
||Ship, research||
||Ship, fishing||
||Ship, other||
||Buoy, moored||
||Buoy, drifting||
||Autonomous Underwater Vehicle||
||Glider||
||Animal||
||aircraft||
||satellite||

=Animal Platform Terms=

Scientific name and common name.  For example, if common name = northern elephant seal and if scientific name = Mirounga angustirostris, the platform term would be a combination of the two.  We recommend to use both common names and scientific names so that it can be searched by either.
The scientific and common name for animals can be found here URL: http://www.marinespecies.org/


=Discussion Forum=

*Sara Haines - 11/28/12*

The Platform Vocab wiki page is a great start.  The use cases really help to understand what the issues are.  Nice addition. Here are my  questions and comments to consider (mostly with regard to the table and but also to help refine use cases).
 
1. Are cameras and radars sensors? Should we classify stations with subclass HFR and webcam stations

2. A cabled array is a set of platforms. 

3. Drifters, buoys, and floats?? not sure how to categorize or map with fixed-station, fixed-profiling, profiling, profile-drifting types of these platforms (discuss more)

4. There should be definitions for each of the platform types (this might help the above comments and questions)


*John Ten Hoeve - 11/29/12*

Thanks for the comments Sara.  You bring up a lot of good points that Rob and I were struggling with here.  

1. We were particularly struggling with the compromise between having accurate terms for platforms but also employing jargon that people have already used.  HFR is a great example, as you noted.  It's technically a sensor, but what would be the platform?  Shore station possibly?  That's why I initially included it as a platform in the table to be more specific.  

2.  I agree with your take on cabled array - it's really a set of platforms but I'm not sure how data from cabled arrays will be handled through web services yet, for instance, SOS.  Will each element of the array be considered a different platform in the world of SOS (i.e. a different DescribeSensor file for each subsurface mooring of the cabled array?)  If so, then the cabled array may be a network and the individual elements, platforms?  In that case, cabled array maybe wouldn't have to be in the platform vocabulary?

3.  I also had trouble with buoys, drifters, floats, and moorings.  I agree that this need some thought.  My best attempt was in the table on the wiki.

4.  I agree that definitions would help a lot

5.  Another issue with the hierarchical framework is that if the lowest element of the hierarchy is used to populate the PlatformType field, then there may be similar terms used across different branches of the hierarchical tree.  I know that in SOS at least you could trace the hierarchy by using the MMI reference, but it still may be confusing for people who only want to look at the term.  Is it worth it to make terms more explicit?  In other words, instead of "Fixed Station"/"Inland Station"/"Dock" in the hierarchy, have a term like "Fixed Station - Inland Station - Dock"


*John Ten Hoeve - 12/13/12*

Some thoughts from the teleconference today:

1.  One of the primary goals is a list of terms and precise definitions

2.  Do we want a hierarchical structure a flat structure?

3.  The vocabulary should be consistent with the international community

4.  Look to other vocabularies for examples and guidance

5.  Hassan's Comment: We need a list of synonyms for the platform vocabulary and we should also be mindful of the specific attributes of those platforms

*John Ten Hoeve - 01/02/13*

Another thought while reading regional progress reports: Since one mooring platform name can have surface and bottom nodes, there may be a need for a term that describes these types of platforms.

== Examples of Existing IOOS Regional Platform Definitions  (Extracted from IOOS Regional Build-Out Plans)==

*SECOORA*

|| *Gliders, Profilers and AUVs:* || 
|| Underwater Gliders are autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) and Profilers programmed to survey the ocean in transects. They can be used for physical and/or water quality sampling (HABs, outfalls, hazardous spills), or with acoustic sea gliders, tracking fish and marine mammals as well as monitoring ambient noise and mapping habitat. || 
|| *AXBTs, AXCTDs, AXCPs* || 
|| Airborne expendable bathythermograph; airborne expendable Conductivity, Temperature, depth; airborne expendable current profilers || 

*NANOOS*

|| *Shore Stations (weather)* || 
|| Meteorological stations provide wind speed and direction, air temperature, sea surface temperature, barometric pressure, humidity, AIS, and rainfall levels. || 
|| *Shore Stations (water) * || 
|| Fixed stations provide water properties at discrete depths, either just surface or surface and deeper. ||
|| *Single-Purpose Buoys * || 
|| Buoys measure waves and SST. ||
|| *Multi-Purpose Buoys * || 
|| Multidisciplinary long-term moorings for shallow water (100 m depth) with a surface buoy and a suite of sensors in the water column below to provide water column conditions at specific depth. ||
|| *Biogeochemical Profiling * || 
|| Automated sensors on  piers  to measure temperature, salinity, chlorophyll, turbidity and water level at frequent intervals in the nearshore coastal ocean.  Add carbon dioxide and oxygen sensors to track ocean acidification and hypoxia in the nearshore environment. ||
|| *Estuarine fixed * || 
|| Fixed stations provide water properties at discrete depths, either just surface or surface and deeper. ||

*CeNCOOS*

|| *Shore Stations (weather; cameras; AIS)* || 
|| Stations measuring meteorological variables and located on coastal lands, piers or docks. We have also included AIS transmitters and automated cameras regularly imaging the ocean, bays or estuaries in this column. || 
|| *Shore Stations (ocean)* || 
|| Stations attached to piers, docks or other structures connected to the shoreline with sensors submerged in water. || 
|| *Moorings* || 
|| Stations attached to a float located at the surface or within the water column and moored to the seafloor.  Sensors may be located at the surface or anywhere in the water column. || 
|| *Seafloor Mounted Stations* || 
|| Stations mounted on the seafloor with no flotation above, e.g. poles, tripods. Measurments may be from anywhere in the water column between the seafloor and the surface. || 
|| *Underwater Gliders: Coastal* || 
|| Spray Underwater Gliders are buoyancy driven profiling autonomous underwater vehicles programmed to survey the ocean || 
|| *Ships/ propeller-driven AUVs* || 
|| Ships are used to make a variety of measurements along fixed regularly occupied transect lines, and also to rapidly respond to changing events and conditions  || 
|| *Jet skis, ATVs* || 
|| Small manueverable vehicles for use in shallow water, or on the beach. || 
|| *Drifters* || 
|| Low cost devices with drogue designed to follow near surface currents.   || 
|| *Animals* || 
|| CTD, light, and other sensors may be attached to animals, such as elephant seals, that travel long distances || 


= Platform/Station types =

Document existing practices and options regarding controlled vocabularies for "platform types" in SensorML DescribeSensor responses. [http://mmisw.org/ont/mmi/platform/ MMI vocabulary]. Note the use of Classification terms from http://mmisw.org/ont/mmi/platform/ . Consequences for IOOS Catalog, including the use of NVS asset-type map icons.

Station Classifiers (in sml:classification/sml:ClassifierList) used in the NANOOS SOS as a draft incomplete implementation, borrowing from either NDBC or NOS/COOPS and possibly others:
{{{
<sml:classifier name="System Type Identifier">
    <sml:Term definition="urn:ioos:def:classifier:NOAA::systemTypeID">
        <sml:codeSpace xlink:href="http://mmisw.org/ont/mmi/platform/" />
        <sml:value>Platform</sml:value>
    </sml:Term>
</sml:classifier>
<sml:classifier name="Platform Type">
    <sml:Term definition="urn:ioos:def:classifier:NOAA:platformType">
        <sml:codeSpace xlink:href="http://nvs.nanoos.org"/>
        <sml:value>MOORED BUOY</sml:value>
    </sml:Term>
</sml:classifier>
}}}

A question I've had about this implementation is, _what the heck is "urn:ioos:def:classifier:NOAA:" referring to?_ I know these urn's don't have to correspond to anything that's documented (much less actual URL's), but are these instances referring to anything that's been discussed or decided before?

= Existing Platform Vocabularies =
MMI Platform Vocabulary: http://mmisw.org/ont/mmi/platform

NDBC: 

SECOORA: 

  * [http://www.seadatanet.org/Standards-Software/Common-Vocabularies SeaDataNet Common Vocabularies]
    * [http://seadatanet.maris2.nl/v_bodc_vocab/search.asp?name=(L06)%20SeaVoX+Platform+Categories&l=L06 L06 SeaVoX Platform Categories]
    * [http://seadatanet.maris2.nl/v_bodc_vocab/search.asp?name=(L061)%20SeaVoX+Platform+Classes&l=L061 L061 SeaVoX Platform Classes]
    * [http://seadatanet.maris2.nl/v_bodc_vocab/search.asp?name=(L062)%20SeaVoX+Platform+Class+Categories&l=L062 L062 SeaVoX Platform Class Categories]

  * The work on an IOOS Non-Federal Asset Inventory in mid 2011 (previously led by Sam Walker) also used some relevant semi-controlled vocabularies; these should be examined.

_DPS Comment: There is a significant conflict in our use of station and platform as synonyms that will be especially evident when we get to the point of tracing lineage within SensorML.  In my mind a platform is a piece of equipment that hosts or carries one or more instruments or sensors.  It can be moved, it has a beginning and ending, and most importantly it's configuration can be modified which raises the requirement to trace the lineage of any data originating from a platform.  A station on the other hand is a fixed location at which a platform might be deployed for a finite period of time.  The station may persist longer than any one platform deployment at that site.  Think of the many different instruments that have derived CO2 at the Mauna Loa site where the [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keeling_Curve Keeling Curve] was observed as an example of this concept. What are the implications if we adopt this view of those two terms?_
  
See also [DescribeSensorMetadataForIOOSSOS discussion by Micah, in wiki page DescribeSensorMetadataForIOOSSOS].


== NANOOS NVS Asset types and icons ==

_Note from Emilio_: Describe and make the [http://nvs.nanoos.org NVS] asset/platform-type map icons available through this wiki later on.
See Mayorga et al, 2010 ("NVS DMAC" Oceans'10 paper).

*Asset classes:*
  * _Stationary In-Situ Observations (SISO)_. Current types: Buoy, Fixed Shore Station, River Gage, Land Station, Seabed Cabled Observatory
  * _Moving-Location observations (MLOC)_. Cruises, AUV's
  * _Gridded Regular and Irregular Data (GRID)_. Models (forecasts), remote sensing imagery, etc.