#summary Thoughts on evaluating current SOS services in preparation for the meeting in Jan/Feb.
#labels Phase-Requirements,SOS

= Objective =

Summary of the current level of services in an effort to identify requirements or problems to solve at the upcoming meeting.

= Criteria for Comparison =
 
  # Does the service support compound offerings such as vector data (e.g. `observedProperty=winds` actually returns three or four scalar quantities such as wind_gust, wind_speed, wind_direction etc)?
  # Collections (e.g. `offering=network-all` returns all buoys in the network) and multiple observed properties (`observedProperty=sea_water_temperature,sea_water_salinity` returns data from both variables with one call)?
  # Correct usage of vocabularies?
  # Are the terms referenced by vocabularies, actually part of the voacabularies?  e.g. `<observedProperty xlink:href="http://mmisw.org/ont/cf/parameter/winds"/>`, winds is not actually part of the CF Standard Name vocabulary despite the URL.  
  # How are resource IDs implemented in the response types?  (This questions is trying to ge at the unique ID problem but isn't stated well.)
  # Which SOS responses are supported?  DescribeSensor? SOS Core Profile, Transactional Profile or Full Profile?
  # Are you eating your own dog food or is this just for “IOOS compliance”?  Do you or any customers you know of actually use your SOS service?  If not, do you know the chief complaint?
  # What is the length of data available from each service (full time series from a ten year record or just the last month or year or whatever)?
  # Are data available on the service representative of the entire RA inventory?  If not, why?  Are these decisions related to technology impediments that we can solve?

== Questions/Comments about the assessment ==
Let's make sure each question has a purpose.  What we're envisioning here is a survey where all members of the team will need to spend time answering a questionnaire.  This is potentially non-trivial so let's make it worthwhile.

How will we collect and/or compile the information?  
  * A template wiki page with questions?  Then copy/paste onto a new wiki page for each respondent?  
  * A linked spreadsheet?
  * ???

Place holder for the work Jeremy started: [https://groups.google.com/d/topic/ioostech_dev/rnngO1AK0Ug/discussion "Thanks for posting the Catalog service endpoints document, from that I went through and tried to choose one SOS from each of the 11 RA's and federal backbone (ndbc,coop,ace) to start some analysis on. Worked up an initial perl script to get the GetCapabilites document... "].