#summary Logistics and other details supporting the Feb 2012 Reference Implementation workshop in Baltimore.
#labels Phase-Design,SOS,Featured
#sidebar SOSTableOfContents

<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />

=IOOS Reference Implementation Working Group Meeting=

== Introduction ==

A small team of IOOS RA DMAC Coordinators are working on development of a reference implementation for SOS for use by the IOOS community.  The meeting will be focused on the development of [SWECommonPlan SWE Common] templates for the data delivered in response to an SOS GetObservation request.   

== Meeting Details ==

 * Arrival: Feb 6
 * Meeting: Feb 7-9
 * Departure: Feb 10

Start time: 8:00 a.m.

[http://baltimore.hyatt.com/hyatt/hotels/index.jsp?null Hyatt Regency Baltimore]

<p>
300 Light Street,<p>
Baltimore, Maryland, USA 21202<p>
Tel: +1 410 528 1234    Fax: +1 410 685 3362<p>
Email: quality@bwirbpo.hyatt.com <p>

[http://baltimore.hyatt.com/hyatt/hotels/services/maps/index.jsp?icamp=propMapDirections Transportation from BWI to Hyatt Regency]

===Meeting Room===
Meeting Room Name: Pratt/Calvert Room - Third Floor.

=== Reservation Information ===
 
To start making your hotel reservation, please follow the link: https://resweb.passkey.com/go/natloceanicaa

Select "Attendee" in the drop down menu under "Guest Type" and you will be able to make your reservations.    

We have secured a room rate of $99.00 per night. *The "cut-off date" is January 12.*  Please make your reservation before Jan. 12 to receive this rate.  

==Copying Locations==

The UPS Store
211 East Lombard St, Baltimore, MD
(410) 659-9360 ‎ 
    

The UPS Store
401 W Pratt St, Baltimore, MD
(443) 220-0280 ‎ 

FedEx Office Print & Ship Center
11 South Charles Street, Baltimore, MD
(410) 625-5862 ‎ 

== Welcome Reception ==

There will be a reception on Monday Night in the Harborview Room - 2nd Floor.
The reception will be between 7 - 8:00PM
The menu will be Light Hors D'Oeuvres and drinks.  

== Agenda ==

Workshop attendees

  #  Emilio Mayorga (NANOOS)
  #  Shane St Clair (AOOS)
  #  Eric Bridger (NERACOOS)
  #  Kyle Wilcox (MARACOOS)
  #  Jeremy Cothran (SECOORA)
  #  Derrick Snowden (US IOOS)
  #  Rob Ragsdale (US IOOS)
  #  Hassan Moustahfid (US IOOS)
  #  Mohamed Chaouchi (CO-OPS)
  #  Don Biven (NDBC)
  #  Frank Lodato (NDBC)
  #  Irven Ingram (USACE)
  #  CJ Pellerin (NCBO) 

High-level agenda outline, with responsible parties.

  * *[SOSRefImplementWorkshop_Day1Agenda Day 1]*
    * (Derrick) Meeting goals and agenda.
    * (Emilio & Eric) [SOSRefImplementWorkshop_Day1Agenda Getting the basics and common elements squared away]: Settling on and clearly documenting conventions, controlled vocabularies, defaults, recommended best practices, etc, for all elements of GetCapabilities requests and responses; a bare-bones DescribeSensor request and response; and a GetObservations request for the case of a fixed point time series.
  * *[SOSRefImplementWorkshop_Day2Agenda Day 2]*
    * (Emilio) Quick wrap-up of discussions from previous day.
    * (Eric & Jeremy) Service assessment, testing and validation. Some relevant wiki pages: [SOSVersions], [SOSSurvey], [SOSTesting], [SOSAssessment], [SWECommonPlan#Testing_(Jeremy)]
    * (Kyle) Part 1: O&M / SWE Common encoding for the [CFFeatureTypes scientific feature types] defined by CF conventions / the Common Data Model.
  * *[SOSRefImplementWorkshop_Day3Agenda Day 3]*
    * (Kyle) Part 2: O&M / SWE Common encoding for [CFFeatureTypes scientific feature types]
    * (Derrick) Taking stock of what we've accomplished, open issues, follow-ups, etc