#summary a SOS question survey to better document and categorize existing features or issues

see also [SOSVersions],[SOSAssessment],[SWECommonPlan],[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1czWdBFjPmAEtLe5T3_54fwk2cUdbILwWPkIDKPKFNvY/edit?hl=en_US SWE Common Encoding Plan]

<wiki:toc max_depth="6" />

co-op parameter listing examples, emilio USGS IDD example conventions
  http://groups.google.com/group/ioostech_dev/browse_thread/thread/85331a089b64716a/a32c8968617bdd41#a32c8968617bdd41
  http://waterservices.usgs.gov/rest/IV-Service.html%23Service

= SOS development history = 

Please if possible provide information on how the SOS you are using was developed or its origins(Oostethys,NDBC,52 North,etc) If your SOS is altered from a reference implementation please describe or provide documentation link(s) to how and why it is different(additional features,work with existing skills/environment,etc).  This information can be used to cross-reference or cross-apply existing documentation or changes.

If you have SOS service usage documentation the same or similar to the below documentation, please provide links to that also.

CO-OPS SOS request parameters http://opendap.co-ops.nos.noaa.gov/ioos-dif-sos/parameters.jsp

NDBC request parameters and example usage links http://sdf.ndbc.noaa.gov/sos/

= General rules = 

A listing of 'rules' which all SOS should follow - if disagree or would like to suggest additional common 'rules', please suggest below

  * no case sensitivity - lowercase preference - request and response characters should not have any dependence on case
  * full namespaces in xml responses
    * post requests also?(ndbc,co-ops)
      * post vs get? who using post and many users?

----
= Request parameters = 

given - service=SOS - default?
given - request= GetCapabilities,DescribeSensor,GetObservation
version - default to latest?

== Collections ==
network-all,featureOfInterest,bbox

given - observedProperty - single or multiple?
winds,vectors,multiple obs request

eventtime - iso8601,minutes/seconds required? always GMT? or time zones

*other default(shorthand) parameter conventions?
  * no time = latest
  * outputFormat vs responseFormat?
    * no format = text/csv 
  * etc?

offering vs procedure
  platform vs sensor request

== Additional parameters ==

http://opendap.co-ops.nos.noaa.gov/ioos-dif-sos/parameters.jsp

result(datum)
unit
timezone
epoch(datum)
datatype(frequency)

----
= Response = 

service identification keywords - RA name like SECOORA,etc
  http://code.google.com/p/ioostech/wiki/RepresentingRAAffiliationInServiceMetadata
  iso 19115, 19119
  
roles/responsibilites semantics/usage

resource id's - redundancies? use same/close long/lat location to help identify overlaps?

data encoding - GML/DIF,SWE Common,Oostethys,...

----
= Additional concerns = 

== Vocabularies, UOM == 

additional instrumentation/example types - profiles,trajectories
  swe data arrays?

== Clients/Testers == 
cite, edc , eric, mine, other testers?

== Usage and Performance ==

any usage of the sos service other than for ioos catalog - if so, one or many? user list and pattern of use(data types,amount,frequency)

usage/data,etc limits
  holdings represented(type,time recency/window,period)
  analysis & planned changes 
   
performance
  analysis & planned changes

----
= Additional comments =