#summary Information about the versions and development history of various SOS's

Please if possible provide information on how the SOS you are using was developed or its origins(Oostethys,NDBC,etc)  If your SOS is altered from a reference implementation(Oostethys,NDBC,52 North,etc) please describe or provide documentation link(s) to how and why it is different(additional features,work with existing skills/environment,etc).

I've listed a GetCapabilities link from the earlier SOS endpoint listing document - if there are additional GetCapabilities,DescribeSensor,GetObservation sample links you would like to share or documentation links, please feel free to add those also.

The goal is to develop hopefully a small handful of SOS implementation references and function/feature profiles that can be the source of possible updates or changes discussion.


= Alaska (AOOS) =

Documentation link(52 North)
https://docs.google.com/document/d/15qKOfJSS3t9JTFZFUsU5ssVNGQxcWYivH9j0XE1puq0/edit?hl=en_US

http://svc.axiomalaska.com:8080/sos2/sos?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

= Caribbean (CaRA) =

not working?

= Central and Northern California (CeNCOOS) =

http://204.115.180.244/sos/server.php?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

= Gulf of Mexico (GCOOS) =

http://gcoos.rsmas.miami.edu/sos/sos_server.php?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

= Great Lakes Observing System (GLOS) =

http://michigan.glin.net/glos/sos/sos.php?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

= Mid-Atlantic (MARACOOS) =

http://www.weatherflow.com/sos/sos.pl?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

= Northwest Pacific (NANOOS) =

http://data.stccmop.org/ws/util/sos.py?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

and a second service documented [NANOOSNVSPythonSOS here]

= Northeastern Atlantic (NERACOOS) =

Oostethys.  There are actually two versions demonstrating the OOSTethsy Perl Toolkit.  SWE and DIF.
=== SWE ===
http://www.neracoos.org/cgi-bin/sos/V1.0/oostethys_sos.cgi?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS
=== DIF ===
http://www.neracoos.org/cgi-bin/sos/V1.0/oostethys_sos_dif.cgi?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

= Pacific Islands (PacIOOS) =

http://oos.soest.hawaii.edu/oostethys/sos?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

= Southern California (SCCOOS) =

http://sccoos-obs0.ucsd.edu/sos/server.php?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

= Southeast Atlantic (SECOORA) =

Documentation link
http://code.google.com/p/xenia/wiki/VMwareProducts#SOS

We have an older(2009) Oostethys version and a 'DIF' version which is a copied response format of the initial NDBC DIF SOS version.

http://neptune.baruch.sc.edu/cgi-bin/oostethys_sos.cgi?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

Xenia: Relational Database Schema used by SECOORA 
Link to Google Code page: http://code.google.com/p/xenia/ 


= NDBC =

Documentation link
http://sdf.ndbc.noaa.gov/sos/

Production server:
http://sdf.ndbc.noaa.gov/sos/server.php?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

Test server:
http://sdftest.ndbc.noaa.gov/sos/server.php?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS


= CO-OPS =
Documentation Link
http://opendap.co-ops.nos.noaa.gov/ioos-dif-sos/


http://opendap.co-ops.nos.noaa.gov/ioos-dif-sos/SOS?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS

Documentation Link for test server

http://opendap.co-ops.nos.noaa.gov/ioos-dif-sos-test/

http://opendap.co-ops.nos.noaa.gov/ioos-dif-sos-test/SOS?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS



= ACE = 

http://sos.usace.army.mil/oracle_server.php?request=GetCapabilities&service=SOS