#summary Proposal for an organization structure for some components of this wiki.
#labels Phase-Implementation

<wiki:toc max_depth="4" />

= Purpose =

The IOOS PO is attempting to organize the overall documentation of DMAC beginning with a reorganization (complete and from scratch) of  ioos.gov/data.  We recognize that the ioos.gov web site is not going to be the only or even primary source of information on IOOS DMAC, let alone all of the other observation and analysis activities across the enterprise.  This wiki is an important source of information but it also deserves some attention and reorganization but the purpose and organization of this wiki should be clarified so that it can grow to serve an important niche (or be abandoned in favor of something better if need be).

The primary purpose of this wiki is to      ????? Please fill in the blank.  The list below is a starting point and keep in mind that the wiki may serve more than one purpose. (comments? votes? alternatives?):
 * to record the unorganized but important issues and solutions arrived at in the course of the SOS Reference Implementation Working group
 * to house an in progress, but always up to date version of the SOS Interface Description Document that contains all the technical information necessary for a developer to either a. write client software to consume IOOS SOS, b. write server software implementing the IOOS profile (what's the correct word? Ioos Specification?) of SOS
 _AB:^IOOS Profile seems to be pretty adequate as^ [http://www.opengeospatial.org/ogc/glossary/p OGC Glossary of Terms] ^defines "profile" as "a collection of standards, with parameters, options, classes, or subsets, necessary for building a complete computer system, application, or function. An implementation case of a more general standard or set of standards."^_
 * to be a technical repository for projects and related activities that use SOS or other data access services? (list of libraries, client software, training materials, demos, presentations?)
 * any/all of the above for each IOOS data access service including SOS, WMS, DAP (all flavors)
 * repository of technical information documenting the entire IOOS architecture including Service Registry, Geoportal, Data Catalog, GTS distribution of data, relationships between major entities etc etc.
 * repository of code implementing various common functions such as a general Python/Java/Matlab/C library of QARTOD algorithms.


= Outline for the High Level Wiki Navigation =

=== Introduction ===

> Text that provides an integrated, high-level description of how the pieces outlined below fit together. Should be relatively brief.

Note that the outline items below appear to be the proposed wiki page ("file") name, right?

=== Data Services and Content Standards ===

 * DataAccessServices
   * SOS
     * [SOSGuidelines_final SOSGuidelines (IDD)]  (THE IDD OR WSDD MUST BE VERSIONED AND WILL REFER TO THE TEMPLATE MILESTONE VERSION.  KEEP LINKAGES FROM THIS PAGE MINIMAL TO KEEP APPLICABLE VERSIONS CLEAR)
       * SOSConcepts (definitions and common usage for observedProperty, featureOfInterest, procedure, and ObservationOffering)
       * Request Parameters and usage
       * Response types (aka Templates)
       * SOSVocabularies (any SOS specific modifications or additions to the overall [Vocabularies_final] ControlledVocabularies page. TODO: Combine Vocabularies_final and ControlledVocabularies into one page (or more likely just delete ControlledVocabularies] and update links throughout wiki.  New page should be named Vocabularies.
     * [SOSClients SOSClients]
       * EnvironmentalDataConnector
       * Proteus 
       * PyOOS
       * JavaNetCDFIOSP
     * SOSServers
       * 52NorthSOS
       * ncSOS
       * DIF SOS (NDBC) Probably should be renamed.  Should these server pages be included underneatht the SOSGuidleines IDD so that the information can be version specific?
       * NANOOS Python SOS
       * OostethysSOS
   * OPeNDAP based services (Guidelines for use, not necessarly an all encompassing technical documentation.  Only IOOS specifics)
     * ERDDAP
     * THREDDS
     * Hyrax
     * PyDAP
     * netCDF (Web Service agnostic discussion of file formats and data models relevant to them.  Mostly focused on netCDF and the so-called standards in use in that area (CF, Glider Files, Argo, OceanSITES, Discrete Sampling Geometries etc)
   * WMS
 * [Vocabularies_final Controlled Vocabularies]
    * See the outline and content currently on that page
 * Metadata    
 * QualityControl

=== IOOS System Integration ===

 * ServiceRegistry
 * DataCatalog
 * [AutomatedAssetInventory AssetInventory]
 * SystemViewer
 * SystemMonitor



= Pieces to consider =
  # Do we need to maintain a complete record of the workshop (preparation/proceedings/conclusions?)
  # Do we need a more thorough crosswalk with CF Discrete Sampling Geometries or is this something better done by other groups or on other information portals and wikis?  CF wiki, [https://geo-ide.noaa.gov/wiki/ NOAA EDM wiki] (formerly geo-ide wiki), [http://wiki.esipfed.org ESIP Federation]?  
  # Filling out the other big pieces of DMAC (RCV, Regional Portals)
  # Playing well with others.  How to register with ocean.data.gov, GEOSS Common Infrastructure, etc.?
  # Intersections with the international programs
  # Observing System specific stuff.  The CF netCDF template for gliders is almost done and doesn't have an online home yet.
  # More direct intersections with HFR/Waves
  # Tools for anything (web harvesting resources, other clients)
  # Training, demos, movies, mashups, example scripts
  # Individual regional IDD noting difference with the generic IDD:
    * ^AB: In my opinion the IDD should be a single document, and regional variety should be captured in the IDD sub-sectiones rather than in separate docs. Otherwise, the main IDD becomes just a notional document that will be replicated every time with regional specifics.  BTW, these specifics have to be relatively small aberrations of the main IDD or else the IOOS Profile term becomes vague.^